>> Woodruff: WAVES OF VIOLENCE
RIPPLED ACROSS EGYPT TODAY.
SCORES ARE DEAD AND THE TOLL IS
STILL RISING, IN THE WAKE OF A
GOVERNMENT CRACKDOWN ON PROTESTS
BY SUPPORTERS OF THE FORMER
PRESIDENT.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT: A
STATE OF EMERGENCY HAS BEEN
DECLARED, PLUNGING EGYPT UNDER A
VIRTUAL MARTIAL LAW.
WE GET THE LATEST FROM CAIRO.
EXPLORE HOW THE SIX-WEEK
STANDOFF DEVOLVED TO BLOODSHED.
>> Woodruff: THEN, IN A RARE
REBUKE OF WALL STREET, TWO
FORMER J.P. MORGAN EMPLOYEES
FACE CRIMINAL CHARGES FOR
RECKLESS TRADING.
WE EXAMINE THE GROWING LEGAL
WOES FOR THE BANKING GIANT.
>> Brown: THE COMMON CORE
STANDARDS IN EDUCATION PUSH
STUDENTS TO THINK CRITICALLY,
SPEAK PERSUASIVELY AND
COLLABORATE.
JOHN MERROW REPORTS ON THE
CHALLENGE OF TESTING THESE
ADVANCED SKILLS.
> YO>U'RE NOT GOING TO BE ASKED
QUESTIONS LIKE: WHAT DID YOU
THINK ABOUT THE THING YOU READ?
YOU'RE GOING TO BE ASKED TO SAY:
"WHAT DID THE AUTHOR THINK?
FIND EVIDENCE IN THE TEXT TO
MAKE THAT BROADER POINT."
>> Woodruff: 50 YEARS LATER, THE
MARCH ON WASHINGTON REMAINS A
SEMINAL MOMENT IN AMERICAN
HISTORY.
TONIGHT, WE KICK OFF A SERIES OF
DISCUSSIONS TO MARK THE
ANNIVERSARY.
>> WE'VE FORGOTTEN MOST OF THE
>> Brown: AND REMEMBERING A
STALWART OF AMERICAN POLITICAL
JOURNALISM.
WE LOOK BACK AT THE CAREER OF
THE LONG-TIME REPORTER,
COLUMNIST AND T. COMV.MENTATOR,
JACK GERMOND.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Brown: THE POLITICAL CRISIS
IN EGYPT REACHED A NEW TURNING
POINT TODAY.
SECURITY FORCES MADE GOOD ON A
PLEDGE TO SWEEP AWAY SIT-INS
THAT SPRANG UP AFTER THE
MILITARY OUSTED PRESIDENT
MOHAMMED MORSI IN LATE JUNE.
THE COUNTRY'S HEALTH MINISTRY
REPORTED AT LEAST 235 CIVILIANS
AND 43 POLICEMEN WERE KILLED AND
MORE THAN 2,000 PEOPLE WERE
HURT.
GUNFIRE AND TEAR GAS FILD THLEE
STREETS OF CAIRO, AS THE
EGYPTIAN CAPITAL TOOK ON THE
SIGHTS AND SOUNDS OF A WAR ZONE.
SHOOTING ERUPTED THIS MORNING AS
POLICE MOVED IN FORCE TO CLEAR
AWAY THE MAIN SIT-IN SITE
OCCUPIED BY SUPPORTERS OF MORSI.
>> ( translated ): THIS BLOOD--
A MAN WAS STANDING NEXT TO ME--
IN A SECOND HE WAS HIT IN THE
CHEST AND DIED.
HE DIED IN A SECOND, HE WAS HIT
IN THE CHEST.
WHAT HAVE WE DONE?
WE HAD MADE A BARRICADE AND WERE
STANDING IN FRONT OF IT, WE
DIDN'T DO ANYTHING.
WE WEREN'T DOING ANYTHING AT
ALL, WE HAD OUR HANDS UP IN THE
AIR, LIKE THIS.
WHY ARE THEY KILLING US?
>> Brown: AN EGYPTIAN INTERNET
T.V. SERVICE SHOWED POLICE
APPARENTLY FIRING LIVE ROUNDS
DIRECTLY INTO THE CROWDS.
BUT STATE T.V. BROADCAST THIS
INFRARED FOOTAGE AND SAID IT
SHOWED THE PRO-MORSI CROWDS
FIRING AT POLICE.
SOME RESIDENTS SAID THE
PROTESTERS SHOT FIRST.
>> ( translated ): THEY ARE
FIRING ON PEOPLE, WITH GUNS AND
AUTOMATIC WEAPONS.
THE ARMY AND POLICE ARE OVER
THERE.
DO YOU HEAR THAT?
PEOPLE CAN'T EVEN STAND OR SEE
WHAT'S HAPPENING AND THEY'RE
FIRING HEAVY WEAPONS ON US.
>> Brown: AT LEAST TWO
JOURNALISTS WERE AMONG THOSE
KILLED: A CAMERAMAN FOR
BRITAIN'S "SKY NEWS" AND A
REPORTER FOR "THE GULF NEWS,"-
BASED IN THE UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES.
A SPOKESMAN FOR EGYPT'S
MILITARY-BACKED INTERIM
GOVERNMENT BLAMED MORSI'S MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD FOR THE BLOODSHED,
AND INSISTED POLICE DID THEIR
BEST TO AVOID ANY KILLING.
>> ( translated ): THE
GOVERNMENT DEMANDS THE POLITICAL
LEADERSHIP OF THE BROTHERHOOD
STOP INCITEMENTS TO VIOLENCE,
WHICH THREATEN NATIONAL
SECURITY; THE GOVERNMENT HOLDS
THESE LEADERS FULLY RESPONSIBLE
FOR ANY BLOOD THAT IS SHED AND
OF ALL ACTS OF RIOTS.
THE GOVERNMENT ALSO SALUTES THE
EFFORTS OF THE SECURITY SERVICES
FOR IMPOSING ORDER IN RELATION
TO THE CLEARING OF THE
USING THE UTMOST SELF-RESTRAINT
AND HIGHEST DEGREE OF
PROFESSIONALISM IN THE OPERATION
TO CLEAR THE SIT-IN.
>> Brown: ALSO THIS MORNING,
SECURITY FORCES CLEARED A
SMALLER SIT-IN WITHOUT MUCH
RESISTANCE.
BUT ELSEWHERE IN THE CITY,
RUNNING STREET BATTLES BROKE
OUT, AND VEHICLES, POLICE
STATIONS, AND GOVERNMENT
BUILDINGS WERE SET ABLAZE.
FROM CAIRO, THE VIOLENCE SPREAD
TO OTHER CITIES ACROSS EGYPT.
IN SUEZ, SMOKE AND TEAR GAS
BILLOWED INTO THE AIR AS PRO-
MORSI DEMONSTRATORS CLASHED WITH
POLICE.
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD SUPPORTERS IN
GIZA USED BARRICADES TO SHIELD
THEMSELVES FROM GUNFIRE.
AND IN ALEXANDRIA, ANTI-MORSI
PROTESTERS JOINED SECURITY
FORCES IN RAIDING PRO-MORSI
CAMPS.
JUST LAST NIGHT, ON THE
"NEWSHOUR", FOREIGN MINISTER
NABIL FAHMY HAD ARGUED IT WAS
IMPERATIVE TO BREAK UP THE
PROTEST SITES.
>> WE HAVE BEEN TRYING TO
RESOLVE IT FOR QUITE A WHILE
NOW.
EVERY EFFORT WILL CONTINUE TO BE
EXERTED TO RESOLVE IT.
THIS ULTIMATELY IS SOMETHING
THAT WILL HELP EGYPT MOVE ON.
>> Woodruff: BUT TODAY'S EVENTS
LAID BARE A SPLIT IN THE REGIME.
VICE PRESIDENT MOHAMED EL-
BARADEI CONDEMNED THE CRACKDOWN
AND RESIGNED IN PROTEST.
A NUMBER OF FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS
WERE HIGHLY CRITICAL AS WELL.
TURKEY HAD CRITICIZED THE OUSTER
OF MORSI, AND PRESIDENT ABDULLAH
GUL REJECTED TODAY'S ACTION.
>> ( translated ): ARMED
INTERVENTION ON CIVILIANS, ON
PEOPLE DEMONSTRATING IS
COMPLETELY UNACCEPTABLE.
NO MATTER WHAT THE REASON IS,
SUCH ACTIONS WOULD OPEN
DANGEROUS DOORS.
>> Brown: THE U.S. RESPONSE CAME
FROM SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY, THIS AFTERNOON IN
WASHINGTON.
>> TODAY'S EVENTS ARE DEPLORABLE
AND THEY RUN COUNTER TO EGYPTIAN
ASPIRATIONS FOR PEACE, INCLUSION
AND GENUINE DEMOCRACY, EGYPTIANS
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE OF THE
GOVERNMENT NEED TO TAKE A STEP
BACK, THEY NEED TO CALM THE
SITUATION AND AVOID FURTHER LOSS
OF LIFE.
>> Brown: BUT EGYPT'S INTERIM
GOVERNMENT GAVE NO SIGN IT WAS
PREPARED TO STEP BACK.
INSTEAD, OFFICIALS DECLARED A
MONTH-LONG STATE OF EMERGENCY
AND IMPOSED A NIGHT TIME CURFEW
ON CAIRO AND TEN PROVINCES.
AS NIGHT FELL, POLICE ANNOUNCED
THEY HAD TAKEN COMPLETE CONTROL
OF THE SIT-IN SITES IN CAIRO.
A SHORT TIME AGO, I SPOKE TO
I SAID EARLIER PRESIDENT MORSI
HAD BEEN OUT OFFED IN LATE JUNE.
IT WAS EARLY JULY.
A SHORT TIME AGO, I SPOKE TO
"NEWSWEEK" AND DAILY BEAST
CORRESPONDENT MIKE GIGLIO.
COVERING THE DISPERSAL OF A
PRO-MORSI SITE IN CAIRO TODAY ,
HE WAS TEMPORARILY DETAINED AND
BEATEN BY EGYPTIAN SECURITY
FORCES.
MIKE GIGLIO, WELCOME TO YOU.
DESCRIBE WHAT YOU SAY TODAY AT
THE CAMP DISBURSAL AND WHAT
HAPPENED TO YOU.
>> I WAS AT THE CAMP BEFORE THE
CRACKDOWN STARTED AND I WAS
THERE AS POLICE VEHICLES ROLLED
IN AS POLICE OPENED FIRE ON THE
CROWDS.
I WAS STANDING ON THE POLICE
LINES WATCHING THEM SHOOT THE
TIER GAS AT THE PROTESTERS AND
ALSO WATCHING THEM SHOOT LIVE
ROUNDS,AS Y OU GUYS DESCRIBED.
AFTER ABOUT AN HOUR OR SO THE
POLICE SEEMED TO DECIDE THEY
DIDN'T WANT JOURNALISTS, AT
LEAST ON THAT SIDE OF THEED UP A
COUPLE OF PHOTOGRAPHERS AND THEY
BEAT US AFTER WE IDENTIFIED
OURSELVES AS BEING JOURNALISTS.
AND THEN THEY DETAINED US FOR
FOUR HOURS WITH A NUMBER OF
PROTESTERS.
>> Brown: WAS THERE ANY
WARPING THIS MORNING BEFORE THEY
CAME INTO THE PROTEST CAMP?
>> THERE WASN'T.
I GOT THERE AROUND 6:00 A.M. AND
THIS IS WHEN MOST PEOPLE ARE
STILL SLEEPING.
THEY WERE ALL PILED INTO THEIR
TENTS.
A FEW PEOPLE WERE WEAK, USING
THE BATHROOM OR SAYING THEIR
MORNING PRAYERS.
AND THEN JUST LIKE THAT, YOU
KNOW, THERE WAS-- THERE WAS A
SURGE OF PANIC THROUGH THE CAMP.
AND YOU SAW PEOPLE RUNNING TO
THE EXITS SAYING THAT THE
SECURITY FORCES WERE COMING.
AND THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF FALSE
ALARMS LIKE THIS BEFORE, BUT IT
WAS PRETTY CLEAR THIS TIME IT
WAS SERIOUS.
SO I WATCHED THE PEOPLE TRYING
IN VERY PANIC FASHION SET UP
BARRICADES USG SINTONES, USING
STICKS BUT THEY WERE QUICKLY
DISMANTLED WHEN THE POLICE CAME.
>> Brown: THEY WERE
DISMANTLED.
THEY PUT UP A FIGHT BUT IT
WASN'T MUCH OF A FIGHT AT THAT
POINT?
>> THEY PUT UP A FIGHT, AND
THERE WAS A REPORT AS YOU
MENTIONED THAT BOTH SIDES HAD
FIREARMS, AND THAT WAS PROBABLY
TRUE.
I SPOKE WITH A COLLEAGUE WHO SAW
THE PROTESTERS THEMSELVESES WITH
FIREARMS.
BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
POINT OUT, WHEN THE POLICE FIRST
ARRIVED, THEY WERE THE ONES I
SAW, AT LEAST, INITIATE THE
FIRINGS.
AND I WAS ON THE FRONT LINES,
LIKE I SAID, OF THE PROTESTERS
AS THEY ARE TRYING TO SET
BARRICADES AND I DIDN'T SEE A
SINGLE WEAPON.
SO I'M NOT DOUBTING THAT THEY
EVENTUALLY DID START USING
WEAPONS BUT AT LEAST AT FIRST IT
WAS POLICE WITH THE VERY HEAVY
HANDED RESPONSE.
>> Brown: MIKE, WHERE DO
THINGS STAND AT THIS MOMENT?
>> RIGHT NOW, CAIRO IS A
TERRIFIED CITY I'D SAY.
THE STREETS ARE CLEARED OUT.
IT'S HARD TO GET A TAXI ANYWHERE
NEAR THE SITE OF ANY OF THE
DEMONSTRATIONS WHICH ARE ACROSS
THE CITY.
THERE WAS A CURFEW ANNOUNCED FOR
7:00 P.M. THIS EVENING, AND
THERE HAVE BEEN CURFEWS IN EGYPT
OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS AND
THEY'RE USUALLY PRETTY WIDELY
IGNORED BUT THIS TIME THE
STREETS WERE COMPLETELY EMPTY.
EVERY SHOP WAS BOARDED UP AND AS
SOON AS THE 7:00 P.M. DEADLINE
HIT, YOU COULD SEE THE ARMY
OFFICERS AND THE POLICE OFFICERS
START TOCK CHECK I.D.ES AND
REALLY ENFORCE IT.
>> Brown: AND, MIKE, FINALLY,
NOW WITH A STATE OF EMERGENCY
DECLARED, WHAT ARE PEOPLE THERE
TELLING YOU ABOUT THE
EXPECTATIONS FOR WHAT'S NEXT?
IS IT MORE VIOLENCE?
>> I THINK THEY'RE READY FOR
MORE VIOLENCE, YES.
I THINK THERE'S A PRETTY
WIDESPREAD HOPE FROM BALTIMORE
COUNTY SIDES THAT THIS WILL
SOMEHOW COME TO A PEACEFUL
CONCLUSION, BUT I THINK JUDGING
FROM THE EVENTS OF TODAY I THINK
THERE'S NO REASON TO EXPECT THAT
ANY TIME SOON SPHWHROW MIKE
GIGLIO OF THE DAILY BEAST, THANK
YOU SO MUCH.
>> Brown: AND BACK LIVE IN OUR
STUDIO NOW I'M JOINED BY NATHAN
BROWN, PROFESSOR OF
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AT GEORGE
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY.
AND OUR OWN MARGARET WARNER.
NATHAN BROWN, LET ME ASK YOU
FIRST, WHAT WAS THE CALCULATION,
DO YOU THINK, FOR THE GOVERNMENT
TO CRACK DOWN TODAY, AND THIS
HARD?
>> WELL, IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE
THERE'S A LOT OF CALCULATION
GOING ON IN EGYPT RIGHT NOW.
IT SEEMS PEOPLE ARE PRETTY MUCH
DUG INTO ENTRENCHED POSITIONS.
THERE WAS A NEGOTIATION PROCESS
THAT WAS UNDER WAY THAT HAS AN
INTERNATIONAL MEDIATION AND A
DOMESTIC MEDIATION BETWEEN THE
BROTHERHOOD AND THE NEW REGIME.
AND THAT SEEMS TO HAVE COME TO
AN END ABOUT LAST WEEK OR SO.
AT THAT POINT, THERE WAS SOME
DETERMINATION TO MOVE FORWARD,
TO MOVE OUT THESE DEMONSTRATORS,
MOVE OUT THE PROTEST CAMPS AND
SO ON.
BUT THE EXACT FORM THAT THAT
WOULD TAKE AND WHEN THAT WOULD
OCCUR NOBODY KNEW.
>> Brown: DOES IT SURPRISE YOU
THE WAY IT HAPPENED WITH THE
FORCE IT HAPPENED?
>> IT DOESN'T SURPRISE ME.
I THINK THERE WERE POSSIBILITIES
FOR A NEGOTIATED SOLUTION, AS I
SAY, AND THERE WERE ALSO
POSSIBILITIES FOR MORE GRADUAL
ACTION.
THOSE WERE THE KINDS OF SIGNALS
THAT THE REGIME WAS GIVING OUT.
BUT IT'S NO SECRET THAT THE
EGYPTIAN SECURITY FORCES WHEN
THEY DO DEAL WITH CROWD CONTROL
DO IT-- HAVE A HISTORY OF DOING
IT IN THE ROUGHEST MANNER
POSSIBLE.
>> Brown: MARGARET YOU'VE BEEN
TALKING TO BOTH EGYPTIAN AND
U.S. OFFICIALS TODAY.
WHAT DO THEY TELL BUWHY THIS
CAME ABOUT AS IT DID?
>> I THINK WE SAW SOME OF IT IN
FOREIGN MINISTER'S FAHMY'S
INTERVIEW.
THEY WERE TRYING TO PREVENT
PROGRESS ON ANYTHING ELSE THEY
WERE TRYING TO DO.
THE SECURITY FORCES FELT IF THEY
WAITED LONGER THEY WOULD LOOK
WEAK.
THEY ALSO CAME TO THE BELIEF,
AND EGYPTIAN OFFICIALS HAVE SAID
THIS TO ME, THAT THE BROTHERHOOD
DIDN'T WANT A PEACEFUL
RESOLUTION.
THEY WANTED BLOODSHED TO CREATE
A-- QUOTE-- NEW NARRATIVE AS
VICTIMS THAT ONE SAID TO ME THEY
CAN LIVE OFF OF FOR 20 YEARS.
WHEN NEGOTIATIONS FAILED, THE
U.S. LEFT WITH SOME SENSE OF
FOREBODING THAT THIS WAS COMING.
>> Brown: BUT SURPRISE?
WERE YOU SENSING SURPRISE FROM
U.S. OFFICIALS?
>> NO, NO, NOT SURPRISE.
I DON'T BELIEVE U.S. OFFICIALS
NEW THE DAY, BUT THEIR ATTEMPTS
TO NEGOTIATE, AS PROFESSOR BROWN
SAID, HAD COME TO NAUGHT.
THERE WAS A U.S. E.U. DELEGATION
AND WHAT THEY WERE PROPOSING TO
BOTH SIDES WAS EACH SIDE STEP
BACK OVER THIS IMMEDIATE
CONFRONTATION.
THE BROTHERHOOD DO SOMETHING TO
SORT OF REIGN IN HOW MUCH THE
CAMPS SPILLED OVER INTO NORMAL
STREETS.
AND THE GOVERNMENT WOULD RELEASE
AT LEAST ONE OR TWO POLITICAL
PRISONERS AS A SIGN THAT, HEY,
WE WANT TO YOU PARTICIPATE.
ACCORDING TO THE E.U. NEGOTIATOR
WHO DID AN INTERVIEW TODAY ON
THE RECORD, IT WAS THE
BROTHERHOOD WHO AGREED
TENTATIVELY, AND IT WAS THE
GOVERNMENT THAT SAID NO.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF
THE RESIGNATION OF MOHAMED
EL-BARADEI.
DOES IT SUGGEST A REAL SPLIT OR
MORE CONSOLIDATION BY THE
MILITARY?
>> IT LOOKS A LITTLE BIT MORE
LIKE CONSOLIDATION.
YOU DO HAVE STILL NOMINALLY A
CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT, A CIVILIAN
EXPRT CABINET.
RIGHT NOW IT SEEMS THE MILITARY
AND SECURITY FORCES ARE CALLING
THE SHOTS.
THAT SAID, I THINK THE MILITARY
AND SECURITY FORCES HAVE
TREMENDOUS POPULAR SUPPORT BAR
DAY IS A LITTLE ISOLATED IN HIS
CALL FOR A NEGOTIATED SOLUTION
WHEN IT COMES TO NONISLAMMIST
FORCES.
>> Brown: FELT THEY COULD DO
IT TODAY AND DO IT HARSHLY AND
THEY WOULD HAVE SUPPORT.
>> AT LEAST OVER THE SHORT TERM
>> I HEARD THAT FROM EGYPTIAN
FRBLEDS.
LAST NIGHT THERE WAS A
CONVERSATION WITH ONE WHO WAS
VISITING WASHINGTON TALKING
ABOUT THIS WHOLE TOPIC, AND HE
SAID, "WELL, WE CAN'T WAIT ANY
LONGER.
THE PEOPLE ARE DEMANDING IT."
THEY HAVE CONVINCED THEMSELVES
THAT THEY ARE WRAPPED IN THIS
INCREDIBLE SURGE OF POPULARITY
AND THEY'VE GOT PEOPLE WITH
THEM.
OF COURSE, IF THE SITUATION
DEVELOPS IN A WAY THEY CAN'T
DELIVER ON JOBS OR ORDER ANY
MORE THAN THE BROTHERHOOD DID,
THAT POPULARITY CAN TURN
TURNINTO UNPOPULARITY QUICKLY.
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER
SIDE.
WE HEARD SECRETARY KERRY
EARLIER.
WHAT HAS THE RESPONSE BEEN BOTH
PUBLICLY AND WHAT YOU COULD PICK
UP?
>> THE QUESTION YOU ASKED
EARLIER ABOUT THE MILITARY
TAKING OVER, I THINK THE U.S.
FEARS IT IS.
IF YOU GO BACK TO WHAT SECRETARY
KERRY SAID IN PAKISTAN LAST
WEEK-- AND IT WAS VERY
CONT
SAID-- THE MILITARY, WE DON'T
THINK THIS WAS A MILITARY
TAKEOVER.
THEY RESPONDED TO THE WISHES OF
THE PEOPLE.
AND HIS EXACT LINE WAS, "TO THE
BEST OF OUR JUDGMENT SO FAR,
THEY DIDN'T TAKE OVER THEMSELVES
TO RUN THE COUNTRY.
THERE'S A CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT."
IN EFFECT, THEY WERE RESTORING
DEMOCRACY.
THERE'S AN IMPLIED WARNING IN
THAT WHICH IS PROVE THIS.
STICK TO THIS.
BUT, YOU KNOW, WHAT HAPPENED
TODAY, THE STATE OF EMERGENCY
AND THE FACT THAT JUST YESTERDAY
THEY APPOINTED 19 GENERALS AS
GOVERNORS OF ALL THESE
PROVINCES, MORE AND MORE
SUGGESTS THIS IS IN FACT
MILITARY RULE WITH A KIND OF
CIVILIAN FIGUREHEAD GOVERNMENT.
>> Brown: NATHAN BROWN, WHAT'S
YOUR SENSE OF THE U.S. OPTIONS
AT THIS POINT?
>> I THINK THE REACTION OF THE
EXECUTIVE BRANCH WILL
ESSENTIALLY BE TO TRY AND DEAL
WITH THIS NEW GOVERNMENT.
THERE WILL BE A LOT OF DISTASTE,
AND A LOT OF PRESSURE FOR THEM
TO PERHAPS RATCHET DOWN THE
VIOLENCE.
I THINK ON CAPITOL HILL, THERE
MIGHT BE A LITTLE DIFFERENT KIND
OF REACTION, A SENSE THAT WE'RE
GIVING AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF
MILITARY AID TO A MILITARY
GOVERNMENT, SO THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION MAY COME UNDER
PRESSURE FROM CAPITOL HILL.
ULTIMATELY, THE POLICY OF MOST
AMERICAN GOVERNMENTS SINCE THE
1970 SYSTEM TO DEAL WITH WHOEVER
IS IT IN CHARGE IN EGYPT.
>> Brown: WHAT'S YOUR SENSE--
DID YOU WANT TO ADD TO THAT?
>> I WAS GOING TO SAY THE
ADMINISTRATION IS CONCERNED
ABOUT RENEWED PRESSURE FROM
CAPITOL HILL AND THEY HAVE TWO
DECISIONS TO MAKE.
THE MILITARY AID IS ONE.
AND THEY COULD DIAL IT BACK OR
RESHAPE IT.
THE OTHER IS THERE ARE MILITARY
EXERCISE, U.S.-EGYPTIAN
SCHEDULED FOR SEPTEMBER, I THINK
IT'S CALLED BRIGHT STAEV
TWO YEARS, AND A DECISION HAS TO
BE MADE PRETTY QUICKLY, I'M
TOLD, ABOUT WHETHER TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH THAT.
>> Brown: WHAT'S YOUR SENSE,
BOTH OF YOU, OF WHAT'S NEXT,
BOTH IN THE IMMEDIATE SENSE ON
THE STREET, AND OVER THE COMING
PERIOD?
IS IT MORE VIOLENCE?
IS IT FURTHER RIFT, SORE DOES
THIS LOOK LIKE IT'S OAF NOW?
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S OVER.
I THINK THAT THERE IS A
POLITICAL PROCESS IN EGYPT THAT
WILL CONTINUE, THAT WILL
BASICALLY-- PRODUCE A REGIME
THAT HAS A CIVILIAN FACE.
THAT WILL KIND OF CONTINUE SO
EGYPT WILL BE ABLE TO CONTINUE
TO SAY WE HAVE A CIVILIAN
LEADERSHIP.
AT THE SAME TIME, I DON'T EXPECT
THE BROTHERHOOD TO DISAPPEAR.
I DON'T THINK WE WILL SEE
ALL-OUT CIVIL WAR BUT WE COULD
SEE A PROLONGED PERIOD OF CIVIL
STRIVE LASTING MONTHS OR YEARS.
>> Brown: MARGARET, THEY'VE
BEEN MOVING DOWN THE ROAD OF A
NEW CONSTITUTION AND THEY'RE
WATCHING THAT CAREFULLY.
>> VERY CAREFULLY.
WHAT THEY FEAR AND AN EGYPTIAN
OFFICIAL SAID THIS CAMP THERE'S
A STATE OF SIEGE ON THE YOWND
WHERE THE POLICE SURROUNDED THE
CAMP AND LEFT ONE EXIT WHERE
PEOPLE COULD GET OUT, BUT THEY
ARE NOT GOING TO LET THAT CAMP
CONTINUE.
THE EGYPTIAN OFFICIALS SAY,
, WE'RE THE MAJORITY.
THEY'RE THE MINORITY.
IF THEY WANT TO JOIN, FINE, BUT
THE IDEA WE HAVE TO MAKE
COMPROMISES-- QUOTE-- THAT'S NOT
GOING TO HAPPEN.
THEY THINK THEY CAN GO FORWARD.
THE U.S. IS CONCERNED WHATEVER
THEY COME UP WITH WON'T HAVE
LEGITIMACY OR INCREDIBLE IF IT
DOESN'T INCLUDE ISLAMISTS.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, NATHAN
BROWN, MARGARET WARNER THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE "NEWSHOUR": CRIMINAL CHARGES
FOR FINANCIAL TRADES GONE BAD;
HOW TO TEST WHAT YOU TEACH; THE
MARCH ON WASHINGTON 50 YEARS ON.
AND WE REMEMBER A LEGENDARY
POLITICAL REPORTER.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: FORMAL PEACE TALKS
RESUMED TODAY IN JERUSALEM
BETWEEN ISRAELI AND PALESTINIAN
NEGOTIATORS.
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME THE TWO
SIDES HAVE MET THERE IN FIVE
YEARS.
AVERAGE ISRAELIS WERE MIXED ON
WHETHER THE U.S.-SPONSORED
NEGOTIATIONS CAN BRING ABOUT
LASTING PEACE.
>> I THINK THE PEACE TALKS
BETWEEN ISRAEL AND PALESTINIANS
IS A VERY, VERY GOOD STEP
FORWARD AFTER A NUMBER OF YEARS
THAT THE PALESTINIANS AND
ISRAELIS DID NOT TALK TO ONE
ANOTHER.
I THINK THAT IT'S ABOUT TIME
THAT THEY START TALKING AND I
HOPE THAT THE OUTCOME WILL BE A
POSITIVE ONE.
.>> TODAY IS A SAD DAY TO
NEGOTIATE ABOUT PEACE FOR PEOPLE
WHO ACCEPTED MURDERERS AS
HEROES.
I CANNOT SEE ANYWHERE THAT THOSE
PEACE NEGOTIATIONS ARE GOING
ANYWHERE.
>> Holman: A SENIOR PALESTINIAN
OFFICIAL WAED TRNHE TALKS MAY
COLLAPSE IF ISRAEL GOES AHEAD
WITH BUILDING NEW HOUSING IN THE
WEST BANK AND EAST JERUSALEM.
MEANWHILE, 26 PALESTINIAN
PRISONERS ARRIVED HOME
OVERNIGHT, IN THE WEST BANK AND
GAZA, TO JOYOUS CELEBRATIONS.
IN ALL, ISRAEL PLANS TO RELEASE
104 PRISONERS IN CONJUNCTION
WITH THE PEACE TALKS.
ARMY PRIVATE FIRST CLASS BRADLEY
MANNING APOLOGIZED TODAY FOR
LEAKING REAMS OF CLASSIFIED U.S.
DOCUMENTS TO THE ANTI-SECRECY
GROUP WIKILEAKS.
HE SPOKE DURING THE SENTENCING
PHASE OF HIS COURT MARTIAL AT
FORT MEADE, MARYLAND.
IN A STATEMENT, HE SAID HE'S
SORRY HIS ACTIONS HURT PEOPLE
AND HURT THE UNITED STATES.
MANNING FACES UP TO 90 YEARS IN
PRISON.
THE SENTENCING HEARING COULD
WRAP UP NEXT WEEK.
FORMER CONGRESSMAN JESSE JACKSON
JUNIOR NOW FACES TWO AND
A-HALF YEARS IN PRISON, FOR
MISUSING CAMPAIGN FUNDS.
THE SON OF CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER
REVEREND JESSE JACKSON WAS
SENTENCED AT A FEDERAL COURT IN
WASHINGTON THIS MORNING.
JACKSON, WHO WAS TREATED FOR
BIPOLAR DISORDER, PLEADED GUILTY
PES
CAMPAIGN ON ITEMS FROM MINK
CAPES TO VACATIONS.
JACKSON'S WIFE, SANDRA, RECEIVED
A ONE YEAR PRISON SENTENCE FOR
FILING FALSE TAX RETURNS.
A TRAVELING HOSPITAL TECHNICIAN-
- ACCUSED OF INFECTING DOZENS OF
PEOPLE WITH HEPATITIS "C"--
PLEADED GUILTY TODAY TO DRUG
CHARGES.
DAVID KWIATKOWSKI APPEARED IN
FEDERAL COURIN
HE ADMITTED STEALING SYRINGESCOM
HOSPITALS, USING THE DRUG THEN
FILLING THE SYRINGES WITH SALINE
TAINTED WITH HIS BLOOD.
HE'S INFECTED WITH HEPATITIS
"C", AND 46 PEOPLE IN FOUR
STATES HAVE BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH
THE SAME STRAIN.
KWIATKOWSKI FACES UP TO 40 YEARS
IN PRISON.
ON WALL STREET,TOCKS WERE DOWN
ON NEW CONCNS CONSUMER
SPENDING IS NOT AS STRONG AS
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 113 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,337.
THE NASDAQ FELL 15 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,669.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND WE TURN TO THE
GOVERNMENT'S PROBE OF FINANCIAL
GIANT J.P. MORGAN AND
SPECIFICALLY TWO FORR
EMPLOYEES CHARGED TODAY WITH
COVERING UP HUGE LOSSES.
THE CASE IS TIED TO MORE THAN $6
BILLION IN TRADING LOSSES EARLY
LAST YEAR.
A TEAM AT THE BANK MADE BIG BETS
KNOWN AS DERIVATIVES AGAINST THE
CREDIT HEALTH OF SOME COMPANIES.
THE BETS WERE WRONG AND LOSSES
IT TARNISHED THE BANK'S
REPUTATION AND RAISED QUESTIONS
OUT ABWALL STREET'S BEHAVIOR IN
THE WAKE OF THE FCI
PROSECUTORS SAID JAVIER MARTIN-
ARTAJO, WHO OVERSAW TRADING AT
THE BANK'S INVESTMENT OFFICE IN
LONDON, TRIED TO FALSIFY JUST
HOW BIG THE PROBLEMS WERE.
HE WAS CHARGED WITH SEVERAL
CRIMINAL COUNTS AS WAS JULIEN
GROUT, A TRADER WHO USED WHAT
PROSECUTORS CALLED COMPLEX
FINANCIAL DERIVATIVES.
.>> WHILE THE TRANSACTIONS AND
FINANCIAL PRODUCTS INVOLVED MAY
BE COMPLEX, THE CRIMINAL
CONDUCTALLED IS SIMPLE AND
STRAIGHTFORWARD.
THE DEFENDANTS DELIBERATELY AND
REPEATEDLY LIED ABOUT THE FAIR
VALUE OF BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN
ASSETS ON J.P. MORGAN'S BOOKS,
IN ORDER TO COVER UP MASSIVE
LOSSES THAT MOUNTED MONTH AFTER
MONTH AT THE BEGINNING OF 2012.
THOSE LIES MISLED INVESTORS,
REGULATORS, AND THE PUBLIC, AND
THEY CONSTITUTED FEDERAL CRIMES.
AS HAS ALREADY BEEN CONCEDED,
THIS WAS NOT A TEMPTEST IN A TEA
POT.
BUT RATHER A PERFECT STORM OF
INDIVIDUAL MISCONDUCT AND
INADEQUATE INTERNAL CONTROLS.
>> Woodruff: THE MAN AT THE
CENTER OF THE CASE-- BRUNO
IKSIL-- BECAME KNOWN AS THE
"LONDON WHALE" BECAUSE OF HIS
CENTRAL ROLE IN THE HUGE TRADES.
BUT HE IS COOPERATING WITH
INVESTIGATORS AND WAS NOT
CHARGED.
FOR ITS PART, J.P. MORGAN STILL
PULLED IN A RECORD PROFIT LAST
YEAR.
REPORTER DAWN KOPECKI IS WITH
BLOOMBERG NEWS AND JOINS ME NOW.
DAWN KOPECKI, WELCOME BACK TO
THE "NEWSHOUR."
FIRST OF ALL, EXPLAIN TO US
EXACTLY WHAT THESE TWO MEN DID
THAT WAS-- THAT THE PROSECUTORS
SAY WAS ILLEGAL.
>> WHAT THEY DID IS IN TRADING
DERIVATIVES, THERE ARE VERY
COMPLICATED FINANCIAL INSTRUMENT
AND THE PRICING OF THEM ISN'T
VERY CLEAR.
THEY CAN USE A RANGE OF PRICES,
AND IN THE PAST J.P. MORGAN HAD
TYPICALLY USED THE MIDRANGE OF
PRICES THAT WERE AVAILABLE ON
THE MARKET.
AS THEIR LOSSES STARTED
MOUNTING, THEY STARTED USING
MORE FAVORABLE PRICING.
IT SOUNDS LIKE A VERY MINOR
DETAIL, BUT BY THE END OF MARCH,
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A DIFFERENCE
OF ABOUT $700 MILLION JUST BY
USING A SLIGHTLY MORE FAVORABLE
PRICE AT THE END OF THE DAY WHEN
THEY WOULD MARK THEIR BOOKS.
IT AMOUNTED TO HIDING ABOUT $700
MILLION IN LOSSES THAT THE U.S.
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE ACCUSED THE
MEN OF HIDING TODAY.
THAT'S AT THE CRUX OF IT.
WHEN THEY USED THE MORE
FAVORABLE PRICING, THEY ALSO
REPORTED THAT TO THE BANK.
THOSE NUMBERS THEN WENT INTO THE
BANK'S BOTTOM LINE NUMBERS THAT
WERE REPORTED TO SHAREHOLDERS.
SO YOU HAVE FALSIFYING BOOKS AND
RECORDS, FALSIFYING INTERNAL
DOCUMENTS.
YOU HAVE A WHOLE HOST OF
SNOWBALLING EFFECT OF CRITICISM
CHARGES THAT FELL OUT FROM THAT,
SIMPLY BY USING SLIGHTLY MORE
FAVORABLE PRICES TO MAKE THEIR
LOSSES LOOK A LITTLE BIT BETTER
EVER SING DAY OVER A TWO- TO
THREE-MONTH PERIOD OF TIME.
>> WHY WERE THE LOSSES SO BIG?
THEY ULTIMATELY RAN INTO THE
BILLIONS, AND THEY KEPT-- THEY
CONTINUED WITH THIS BEHAVIOR.
>> YEAH.
NO, THE LOSSES WERE LARGE
BECAUSE WHAT HAPPENED IS THE
MARKETS STARTED GETTING WIND--
THEY STARTED CATCHING WIND ABOUT
WHAT THESE TRADERS WERE DOING
AND WHERE THEIR POSITIONS WERE.
WE STARTED REPORTING ON IT.
WE ACTUALLY BROKE THAT STORY
LAST YEAR.
OTHER NEWS OUTLETS REPORTED ON
IT.
AND AS SOON AS HEDGE FUNDS AND
OTHER MAJOR BANKS FOUND OUT
WHERE THESE GUYS WERE TRADING,
WHAT THEY WERE TRADING, THEY
STARTED TRADING AGAINST THEM.
IT HAD THE COMBINATION OF THE
ECONOMICS, THE ECONOMY GOING
AGAINST THEM.
IN ADDITION THE MARKET JUST
DESCENDED.
IT'S LIKE SHARKS SMELLING BLOOD
IN THE WATER, AND THEY JUST
DESCENDED UPON THESE TRADERS,
SQUEEZED THEM OUT OF THE
POSITION, AND IT CAUSED THE
TRADE TO JUST HEMORRHAGE.
ALSO IN MID-MARCH, INA DREW WHO
RAN THE DIVISION TOLD THE
TRADERS TO JUST STOP TRADING SO
THEY COULDN'T DEFEND THEIR
POSITION.
THEY COULDN'T GO OUT AND PUT
OTHER HEDGES AGAINST THE
POSITIONS AND THAT'S WHEN YOU
SAW THE DAILY LOSSES ESCALATING
INTO THE HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
WE'RE TALKING GOING FROM, LIKE,
$30 MILLION TO $50 MILLION TO
$60 MILLION TO A DAILY LOSS LOSS
OF $350 MILLION.
YOU SAW THE TRADE BLOW OUT
COMPLETE PLEA IN MID-MATCH AFTER
THEY STOPPED PARADING AND WERE
ABLE TO HEDGE AGAINST THAT
PUBLIC POSITION.
THAT'S HOW IT ENDED UP BEING A
$6.2-PLUS BILLION LOSS.
>> ARE THEY SAYING HIGHER UPS
HAD NO IDEA WHAT WAS GOING ON
HERE?
>> THEY'RE NOT SAYING THAT.
THEY'RE, IN FACT, NOT CLOSING
THE DOOR ON LOOKING AT OTHER
EXECUTIVES.
I WAS AT THE PRESS CONFERENCE
TODAY, AND SPECIFICALLY ASKED
THEM-- THEY SAID THAT THE
INVESTIGATION IS STILL OPEN.
AND I SAID, "SO DOES THAT MEAN
THAT OTHER EXECUTIVES MAY BE
UNDER INVESTIGATION?"
AND THEY SAID THAT GENERALLY,
WHEN AN INVESTIGATION IS STILL
OPEN, THEY'RE LOOKING AT OTHER
EXECUTIVES.
SOME SECURITIES ATTORNEYS,
CRITICISCRIMINAL ATTORNEYS WE SH
SAID THESE GUYS ARE RELATIVELY
SMALL, RELATIVELY LOW RUNGS ON
THE LADDER AT J.P. MORGAN, AND
TYPICALLY THEY'LL BRING THESE
GUYS IN AND TURN TO-- IT'S
CALLED TURN STATES EVIDENCE, TRY
TO GET THEM TO TURN ON THEIR
COLLEAGUES, STRIKE A SIMILAR,
NONPROSECUTION AGREEMENT TYPE OF
DEAL AS IX GOT, AND THEN-- BRUNO
IKSIL GOT AND TESTIFY AGAINST
OTHER EXECUTIVES.
THE PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE DID HINT
AT THE FACT THAT AT SOME POINT,
MARTIN-ARTAJO, WHO WAS THE
MANAGER OF-- BRUNO IKSIL'S
MANAGER AND JULIEN GROUT'S
MANAGER, SAID THESE ORDERS WERE
COMING DOWN FROM NEW YORK, SO
THERE'S A HINT IN THE CHARGES
THAT AT LEAST ACCORDING TO
MARTIN-ARTAJO, HE THOUGHT THESE
ORDERS WERE COMING DOWN FROM
HIGHER UPS IN NEW YORK, AND SO
THAT OTHER ATTORNEYS HAVE SAID,
MAKES THEM THINK THAT THEY MAY
WANT TO TRY TO GO AFTER OTHER
EXECUTIVES.
BUT IF THEY CAN'T EXTRA DIED
DIET THESE GUYS, THESE GUYS
AREN'T IN THIS COUNTRY, IF THEY
CAN'T EXTRADITE THEM AND GET
THEM TO TALK THE INVESTIGATION
ISN'T GOING TO GO VERY FAR
BEYOND THE TWO THAT THEY'VE
NAMED TODAY.
>> SO THERE'S A QUESTION OF
WHETHER THEY'LL BE ABLE TO GET
THEIR HANDS ON THEM.
.>> YES.
>> I WANT TO ASK YOU, WHAT DOES
THIS MEAN FOR J.P. MORGAN?
THE FACT THAT IT'S JUST TWO
LOWER-LEVEL PEOPLE AT THIS POINT
WHO HAVE BEEN CHARGED.
THE FACT THAT REGULATORS SPENT
MONTHS LOOKING INTO THIS, AND AS
YOU SAY THEY'RE STILL LOOKING AT
J.P. MORGAN.
>> THEY ARE, AND J.P. MORGAN
EXPECTS TO PAY SOME PRETTY HEFTY
FINES.
THEY EXPECT TO BE FIND'D FIND BY
VIRTUALLY EVERY REGULATOR
LOOKING AT THIS.
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, CIVIL
FINES, CRIMINAL IS NOT SO CLEAR
JUST YET, BUT CIVIL IS PROBABLY
DEFINITELY ON THE TABLE,
ACCORDING TO PEOPLE WE'VE SPOKEN
TO.
THE SEURITCIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION, THE COMMODITY
FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION, AND
AS WELL, THE FINANCIAL CONDUCT
AUTHORITY IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
SO FOR J.P. MORGAN, THEY'RE
GOING TO BE WRITING CHECKS.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE WRITING A
LOT OF CHECKS FOR THE NEXT
COUPLE OF MONTHS ON THIS.
THEY'RE FACING AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF LITIGATION FROM
SHAREHOLDERS.
THE COMPANY LOST AS MUCH AS $51
BILLION IN SHAREHOLDER VALUE AT
ONE POINT LAST SUMMER.
THEIR STOCK PRICE HAS RECOVERED
FROM THAT, BUT SHAREHOLDERS CAN
STILL SUE BASED ON WHAT IT LOST
LAST SUMMER.
SO THEY'RE FACING SHAREHOLDER
LAWSUITS ON THAT.
IT'S JUST SUCH A BIG BLACK EYE
TO THEIR REPUTATION.
IT INCREASES THE SCRUTINY THAT
THEY'RE GETTING FOR OTHER
REGULATORS AS WELL, AND ALSO,
BECAUSE THEY WERE TRYING TO GAME
REGULATORY CAPITAL RULES, THE
TRADE IS VERY COMPLEX, AND THEY
WERE TRYING TO GAME BASICALLY
THE REGULATORY CAPITAL RULES.
IT HAS DRAWN MUCH MORE SCRUTINY
ON THOSE RULES, AND REGULATORS
ARE MUCH MORE IN TUNE TO TRY TO
TIGHTEN THOSE RULES SO THAT
BANKS CAN'T DO THIS.
ALSO, THE VOLCKER RULE, WHICH
BANS PROPRIETARY TRADING,
THEY'RE LOOKING AT STRENGTHENING
THAT TO PROHIBIT BANKS FROM
BEING ABLE TO MAKE THESE KINDS
OF RISKY BETS WITH THEIR OWN
MONEY.
SO IT'S HAD A WHOLE CASCADING
EFFECT ON THE REGULATORY FRONT,
LITIGATION, AND ALSO IT'S GOING
TO HIT THEIR BOTTOM LINE WITH
ALL OF THESE FINES.
>> I WAS GOING TO ASK YOU IF
THERE WERE IMPLICATIONS MORE
BROADLY FOR WALL STREET AND IT
SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE SAYING THAT
IT WILL.
>> YES.
IT IS.
EXACTLY.
.>> WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO LEAE
IT THERE FOR NOW.
WE THANK YOU VERY MUCH, DAWN
KOPECKI.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: NOW, THE SECOND OF TWO
STORIES ON NEW LEARNING
STANDARDS KNOWN AS THE "COMMON
CORE."
LAST NIGHT, THE "NEWSHOUR'S"
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FOR
EDUCATION, JOHN MERROW, LOOKED
AT HOW IT COULD CHANGE TEACHING
AND CURRICULUM.
TONIGHT, HE LOOKS AT THE IMPACT
ON TESTING.
>> Reporter: FOR CLOSE TO 75
YEARS, STUDENTS HAVE TAKEN
MULTIPLE CHOICE TESTS.
ALTHOUGH THESE TESTS MAY BE GOOD
ENOUGH TO EVALUATE BASIC
READING, WRITING AND ARITHMETIC
SKILLS, THEY WILL NOT BE ABLE TO
ASSESS THE MORE COMPLEX COLLEGE
AND CAREER-READY STANDARDS KNOWN
AS THE COMMON CORE.
>> THE COMMON CORE STANDARDS
GIVE US A ROADMAP OF WHAT SKILLS
STUDENTS SHOULD HAVE AND HOW
STUDENTS SHOULD BE THINKING.
EACH OF YOU NEED TO HAVE AT
LEAST TWO PIECES OF EVIDENCE YOU
WOULD USE TO SUPPORT EACH IDEA.
>> Reporter: THESE NEW STANDARDS
REQUIRE STUDENTS TO THINK
CRITICALLY...
>> FREEDOM OF SPEECH SHOULD MEAN
WHAT IT SAYS, FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
>> Reporter: ...SEAKP
PERSUASIVELY...
>> THE RUB-A-DUB SCRUB TAKES THE
USUALLY WASTED ROTATIONAL
KINETIC ENERGY.
>> Reporter: ...AND COLLABORATE
WITH THEIR PEERS.
>> THIS ONE HAS TO BE MUCH
LONGER.
>> Reporter: RECOGNIZING THAT
CURRENT MULTIPLE CHOICE TESTS
ARE NOT CAPABLE OF ASSESSING
THESE COMPLEX SKILLS AND KNOWING
THAT INDIVIDUAL STATES COULD NOT
AFFORD THE COST OF DESIGNING NEW
TESTS, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
STEPPED IN.
>> I BELIEVE THIS NEW GENERATION
OF ASSESSMENTS IS AN ABSOLUTE
GAME-CHANGER FOR AMERICAN
EDUCATION.
>> Reporter: IN THE FALL OF
2010, THE AMAOB ADMINISTRATION
GAVE $362 MILLION TO TWO
ORGANIZATIONS TO WORK WITH
STATES IN DESIGNING NEW WAYS TO
MEASURE THE STANDARDS.
>> WELCOME FOLKS IN THE ROOM.
I BELIEVE WE HAVE REPRESENTATION
FROM ARIZONA, ARKANSAS.
>> Reporter: CLOSE TO 40 STATES
AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA ARE
NOW WORKING TO CREATE COMMON
CORE TESTS.
>> THIS IS YOUR TEST.
OUR JOB IS TO MAKE IT REFLECT
THE VISION AND BEST PRACTICES OF
STATES.
>> Reporter: LAURA SLOVER IS
VICE PRESIDENT OF PARCC, ONE OF
THE TWO ORGANIZATIONS DEVELOPING
THE TESTS.
>> THESE ARE GOING TO LOOK
DIFFERENT, FEEL DIFFERENT,
THEY'RE GOING TO BE MORE
ENGAGING TO STUDENTS AND NOT AS
DRY AS A STRAIGHT PENCIL AND
PAPER TEST.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS WILL NOW
BE TESTED ON COMPUTERS.
THEY'LL CLICK OR TYPE THEIR
ANSWERS, WATCH AND RESPOND TO
VIDEOS AND MANIPULATE OBJECTS ON
THE SCREEN.
THERE WILL BE SOME MULTIPLE
CHOICE QUESTIONS, BUT TEST
MAKERS SAY THEY WILL REQUIRE
MORE CRITICAL THINKING.
>> YOU'RE NOT GOING TO BE ASKED
QUESTIONS LE-- IKWHAT DID YOU
THINK ABOUT THE THING YOU READ?
YOU'RE GOING TO BE ASKED TO SAY
WHAT DID THE AUTHOR THINK?
FIND EVIDENCE IN THE TEXT FOR
THAT TO MAKE A BROADER POINT.
>> WE'RE BEGINNING TO PUSH THEM
TO READ MORE COMPLEX TEXT.
>> Reporter: BARBARA KAPINUS
WORKS FOR THE OTHER FEDERALLY-
FUNDED GROUP, SMARTER BALANCED.
>> BY DOING IT ON THE COMPUTER,
WE'RE BRINGING THE KIDS INTO THE
21ST CENTURY IN HOW THEY DEAL
WITH INFORMATION PROCESSING.
>> Reporter: BUT CAN A
COMPUTERIZED TEST ACCURATELY
MEASURE THE MORE SOPHISTICATED
COMMON CORE SKILLS LIKE
SPEAKING, LISTENING, AND
COLLABORATION-- SKILLS THAT
BUSINESS LDERSEA SAY THEY VALUE
ST.MO
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE WANT TO
EXPAND THIS ENGLISH LANGUAGE
ARTS TESTING.
BECAUSE FOR YEARS, WE SAY IT'S
NOT JUST READING AND WRITING,
IT'S LISTENING AND SPEAKING.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU DEVELOPING
TESTS, WAYS OF MEASURING HOW
WELL I SPEAK?
>> NO.
WE WANTED TO AND WE HAD HOPED
TO, BUT WE'RE NOT THERE.
WE CAN'T DO THAT.
>> Reporter: IF THESE NEW TESTS
CANNOT MEASURE ALL THE COMMON
CORE SKILLS, ONE SOLUTION MIGHT
BE TO RELY ON BOTH THE TESTS AND
THE JUDGEMENT OF TRAINED
TEACHERS.
LET THEM ASSESS HOW STUDENTS DO
WHEN IT COMES TO WORKING
COOPERATIVELY, LISTENING
CRITICALLY AND SPEAKING
PERSUASIVELY.
THAT, HOWEVER, WOULD REQUIRE
TRUSTING TEACHERS.
DO WE, AS A NATION, TRUST
TEACHERS?
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK?
I DON'T THINK SO.
IT SEEMS LIKE EVERYONE HAS THIS
IDEA THAT TEACHERS CLOCK IN AT
8:00, CLOCK OUT AT 3:00, GO HOME
AND RELAX.
BUT THAT'S NOT THE LIFE OF ANY
TEACHER THAT I KNOW.
SO I-- NO, I DON'T THINK THE
NATION TRUST TEACHERS.
>> Reporter: SHE MAY BE RIGHT.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT DEMANDS
THAT THE TESTS PRODUCE DATA THAT
CAN BE USED TO JUDGE TEACHERS
AND PRINCIPALS, NOT JUST
STUDENTS.
>> THE WAYS THEY WANT TO USE THE
DATA ON THIS TEST ARE EVIDENCE
THAT THEY DO NOT TRUST THE
TEACHERS.
>> Reporter: AND WHO'S "THEY?"
>> I THINK POLICY MAKERS.
PEOPLE IN CONGRESS.
GOVERNORS.
>> Reporter: IF THE NEW TESTS DO
NOT MEASURE COMMON CORE
STANDARDS LIKE SPEAKING AND
LISTENING, WILL TEACHERS TEACH
THEM?
>> WRITE TWO FACTS ABOUT...
>> Reporter: OR WILL THEY BE
TEMPTED TO TEACH TO THE TEST AND
FOCUS ONLY ON THE SKILLS THAT
TESTS MEASURE?
>> THERE WILL ABSOLUTELY BE
TEMPTATION TO GO BACK TO DRILL
AND SKILL.
THERE'S A LOT OF WORK ON, NOT
JUST THE TEACHER'S PART, BUT ON
SCHOOLS AND ON THE DOE THAT
NEEDS TO BE DONE SO THAT
TEACHERS AREN'T SO SCARED THAT
THEY GO BACK TO DRILL AND SKILL.
I WAS REALLY PROUD OF YOU FOR
MAKING SURE THAT YOU USED TEXT
EVIDENCE TODAY.
>> Reporter: IF NOTHING CHANGES,
IN THE SPRING OF 2015, LESS THAN
TWO YEARS FROM NOW, STUDENTS IN
ABOUT 40 STATES WILL TAKEHESE T
NEW TESTS.
THE CLOCK IS TICKING.
>> Brown: ONLINE, EIGHTH GRADERS
GIVE THEIR ASSESSMENT OF THE
TEST AND ADVICE ON HOW TO MASTER
IT.
FIND A LINK TO THAT VIDEO ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
>> THE 50th ANNIVERSARY OF
THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON IS ONE
WEEK AWAY.
WE HEAR FROM ONE OF THE
PARTICIPANTS, DOROTHY COTTON.
IN THE 60s SHE WAS THE
EDUCATION DIRECTOR OF THE
SOUTHERN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE.
SHE ORGANIZED WORKSHOPS
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY IN
ADVANCE OF THE MARCH.
.>> BY THE THIRD DAY OF THIS
FIVE-DAY WORKSHOP, PEOPLE WERE
SINGING SONGS "
I'M GOING TO DO WHAT THE
SPIRIT SAYS DO
WHAT THE SPIRIT SAYS DO I'M
GOING TO DO, LORD
I'M GOING TO DO WHAT THE
SPIRIT SAYS DO
GUESS WHAT THE NEXT VERSE WAS
I'M GOING TO VOTE BECAUSE THE
SPIRIT SAID VOTE
SPIRIT SAID VOTE."
I'M GOING TO VOTE BECAUSE THE
THEY MADE UP VERSES.
SPIRIT SAID VOTE."
THAT WAS A SONG THEY SANG IN
THEY MADE UP VERSES.
CHURCHES.
THAT WAS A SONG THEY SANG IN
I'LL GO TO JAIL IF THE
CHURCHES.
CHURCHES SAY JAIL."
THERE WERE SONGS OF DECLARATION
THAT I'M NOT GOING TO TAKE THE
ABUSE ANY MORE.
THE PEOPLE WHO HAD ATTENDED THE
CITIZENSHIP EDUCATION WORKSHOPS
IN LARGE PART WERE THE FOLK WHO
MADE UP THE BIG DEMONSTRATIONS
THAT GOT A LOT OF NEWS COVERAGE
BECAUSE PEOPLE NOW ARE BEING
INTRODUCED TO POLITICAL POWER
AND WHAT IT MEANS TO BE A
CITIZEN IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Brown: THAT WAS DOROTHY
COTTON FROM ITHACA, NEW YORK.
SHE'S ONE OF THE MANY
PARTICIPANTS WHOSE FIRST HAND
ACCOUNTS OF THE 1963 MARCH ON
WASHINGTON APPEARS IN THE NEW
WEB SERIES, "MEMORIES OF THE
MARCH" PRODUCED BY PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATIONS AROUND THE
NATION.
FOR THE PBS WEBSITE, "BLACK
CULTURE CONNECTION."
NOW, GWEN IFILL KICKS OFF OUR
OWN SERIES OF CONVERSATIONS
COMMEMORATING THE 50th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE EVENT.
>> Ifill: IN THE SUMMER OF
MEAN 63 THE LINES
WERE STILL
CLEAR, WHITESES HERE, CALENDAR
THERE.
A FULL CENTURY AFTER THE SLAVES
WERE EMANCIPATED THE AVERAGE
BLACK FAMILY EARNED ROUGHLY HALF
THE INCOME OF WHITE FAMILIES.
BLACK WORKERS WERE TWICE AS
LIKELY TO BE JOBLESS.
NINE YEARS AFTER THE SUPREME
COURT OUTLAWED SEPARATE BUT
EQUAL EDUCATION, THE MAJORITY OF
THE NATION'S SCHOOLS REMAINED
SEGREGATED.
IN THE SOUTH, ALABAMA GOVERNOR
GEORGE WALLACE PLEDGED TO KEEP
THE RACES APART.
>> SEGREGATION NOW.
SEGREGATION TOMORROW.
AND SEGREGATION FOREVER.
( CHEERS )
>> Ifill: AS FREEDOM RIDERS
AND OTHER ACTIVISTS FOUGHT TO
DESEGREGATE LUNCH COUNTERS AND
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION, MANY OF
THEM WERE ARRESTED, ATTACKED
WITH DOGS AND SPRAYED WITH FIRE
HOSES.
SOME WERE KILLED.
AGAINST THAT BACKDROP, MORE THAN
200,000 PEOPLE FROM ALL OVER THE
COUNTRY TRAVELED TO THE NATION'S
CAPITAL 50 YEARS AGO THIS MONTH,
BROUGHT TOGETHER WITHOUT BENEFIT
OF SOCIAL MEDIA OR BROAD LIE
TELEVISED APPEALS IN CARS,
CHARTERED BUSES AND TRAINS TO
PARTICIPATE IN WHAT THE
MULTIRACIAL CROWD WOULD CALL,
"THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON FOR
JOBS AND FREEDOM."
WILLIAM JONES IS PROFESSOR OF
HISTORY SDOIA UNIVERSITY OF
WISCONSIN MADISON AND AUTHOR OF
"THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON-- JOBS,
FREEDOM AND THE FORGOTTEN
HISTORY OF CIVIL RIGHTS."
THANKS FOR JOINING US FOR THIS
CONVERSATION.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME ON.
>> Ifill: PEOPLE HAVE LOTS OF
IDEAS ABOUT THE MARCH.
EVEN IN MY OWN HOUSEHOLD WE HAD
A LOT OF IDEAS ABOUT WHAT THE
MARCH WAS AND WHAT IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE.
HOW DID IT COME TO BE?
THE ROOTS OF THE MARCH GO BACK
20 YEARS BEFORE 1963 TO A MARCH
THAT WAS CALLED AND THEN CALLED
OFF AT THE LAST MINUTE DURING
THE SECOND WORLD WAR.
THE LEADER OF THAT MARCH WAS A.
PHILLIP RANDOLPH AIR, BLACK
TRADE UNIONIST, A LABOR LEADER,
WHO WAS ALSO THE LEADER AND
INITIATOR OF THE MARCH IN 1963.
>> Ifill: SO A. PHILLIP
RANDOLPH IS REALLY THE STAR OF
THE SHOW ORIGINALLY, OF THE
EVENT, ORIGINALLY, NOT MARTIN
LUTHER KING JR.
.>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THAT REMAINED TRUE THROUGH
THE MARCH IN 1963.
HE WAS THE PRIMARY LEADER OF
THAT MARCH.
HE WAS PRIMARILY SEEN AS THE
LEADER.
THE PRESS, FOR EXAMPLE, "LIFE"
MAGAZINE CARRIED A PICTURE OF A.
PHILLIP RANDOLPH AND HIS
ASSISTANT, BAIRD RUSTON" ON THE
COVER OF THEIR ISSUE AFTER THE
MARCH.
THEY WERE CLEARLY SEENS AS
LEADERS OF THE TIME.
>> Ifill: YOU WRITE IN THE
BOOK THAT THE MARCH HAD ITS
ROOTS IN MORE RADICAL FORM OF
POLITICAL THOUGHT THAN IT IS NOW
THOUGHT-- REMEMBERED.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
A. PHILLIP RANDOLPH WAS A
LIFETIME SOCIALIST, AND LEADER
IN THE SOCIALIST PARTY, AND HE
BELIEVED-- AND I THINK MANY OF
THE LEADERS, INCLUDING KING--
BELIEVED THAT ECONOMIC JUSTICE
AND REALLY AN IMPORTANT CHANGE
IN THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM WAS
REALLY CRITICAL TO REACHING THE
GOALS OF RACIAL EQUALITY THAT WE
NOW ASSOCIATE THE MARCH WITH.
>> Ifill: EXCEPT THAT WE DON'T
HEAR-- WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THE
MARCH, WE DON'T HEAR THAT MUCH
ABOUT ECONOMIC-- THAT THIS WAS A
MARCH FOR JOBS AND FREEDOM.
WE HEAR A LOT ABOUT THE DREAM.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Ifill: HOW DID THAT CHANGE?
HOW DID THAT EVOLVE?
>> IN SOME WAYS IT EVOLVED
BECAUSE THESE WERE ISSUES THAT
WERE HARD TORE TALK ABOUT,
PEOPLE WERE NOT FAMILIAR WITH
AND THE SOLUTION WERE SEEN AS
MORE RADICAL.
INTERESTINGLY, MARTIN LUTHER
KING SPEECH, THE ONE WE ALL KNOW
ABOUT, IS THE ONE THAT IS THE
LEAST SPECIFIC ABOUT THE ACTUAL
GOALS OF THE MARCH WHICH
INCLUDED A WHOLE LIST OF
ECONOMIC REFORMS.
IN MANY WAYS THAT WAS BECAUSE HE
WAS THE LAST SPEAKER AND BY THE
TIME HE GOT ON THE STAGE IT
WASN'T NECESSARY TO REPEAT THE
THE FACT THAT THEY WERE CALLING
FOR A PUBLIC WORKS PROGRAM.
THEYENTED TO RAISE THE MINIMUM
WAGE.
HE WAS THERE TO UPLIFT AT THE
END.
BY THE TIME HE GOT ON STAGE, IT
WAS VERY CLEAR TO EVERYBODY
THERE WHAT THE FULL LIST OF
DEMANDS WAS.
>> Ifill: DID WE TAKE THAT,
THE DREAM FROM THIS MARCH
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT WE WANTED TO
HEAR OVER TIME, THAT THE UPLIFT
WAS LESS THREATENING OR
CHALLENGING THAN THE DEMAND.
>> TO A CERTAIN EXCEPT THAT'S
TRUE.
MARTIN LUTHER KING'S SPEECH
ACTUALLY DID NOT BECOME
PRIMARILY ASSOCIATED AS THE
MESSAGE OF THE MARCH UNTIL AFTER
KING'S ASSASSINATION IN 1968.
AND I THINK IN SOME WAYS, PEOPLE
LOOKED BACK TO THAT SPEECH
BECAUSE IT WAS AN UPLIFTINGINOGE
COUNTER-ACT THE ASSASS NEIGHBORS
THE ANGER AND THE SORT OF
FRUSTRATION OF THE LATE 1960s
WITH THE LACK OF PROGRESS
TOWARDS RACIAL EQUALITY.
SO IT WAS, IN SOME WAYS, A
HINDSIGHT, GOING BACK AND
LOOKING FOR A POSITIVE MEM.
>> Ifill: THE MARCH WASN'T
JUST ABOUT ACCESS TO SCHOOLING,
WHICH CAME TO BE THE BUSSING
CHALLENGES LATER IN THE 70s,
BUT IT WAS ABOUT CREATING BETTER
SCHOOLS.
>> RIGHT.
AND I THINK-- YOU KNOW, IF WE
WERE AT THE TIME THE MARCH TOOK
PLACE, PRESIDENT KENNEDY HAD
ALREADY INTRODUCED A CIVIL
RIGHTS BILL CALLING FOR
INTEGRATION IN SCHOOLS, ACCESS
TO PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS,
PROTECTIONS OF VOTING RIGHTS.
10 YEARS BEFORE THE MARCH, THE
SUPREME COURT HAD RULED THAT
SEGREGATED SCHOOLS IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
SO THAT WASN'T REALLY THE GOAL
OF THE MARCH.
THE GOAL OF THE MARCH WAS STRONG
FEDERAL ACTION OF UPHOLDING THE
IDEALS OF EQUATE.
>> Ifill: YOU MENTIONED
PRESIDENT KENNEDY.
HE WAS NOT NECESSARILY A FAN OF
THIS MARCH IN ADVANCE OF IT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
BECAUSE HE HAD INTRODUCED THE
CIVIL RIGHTS BILL BEFORE THE
MARCH, HE WAS AFRAID THAT A
MARCH WOULD ACTUALLY DERAIL THE
BILL, THAT IT WOULD GIVE
CONSERVATIVES AN EXCUSE TO VOTE
AGAINST IT.
HERE ARE THESE PEOPLE WHO ARE
RABBLE ROUSERS.
WE DON'T WANT THEM FORCING OUR
HAND, AND SO THEY-- IT WAS AN
EXCUSE TO OPPOSE THE BILL IN
KENNEDY'S MIND.
AND SO HE REALLY-- HE WORKED
VERY HARD TO TRY TO CONVINCE A.
PHILLIP RANDOLPH AND MARTIN
LUTHER KING AND OTHER LEADERS OF
THE MARCH TO CALL IT OFF.
>> Ifill: BEFORE SHE DIED I
INTERVIEWED DORHE HEIGHT ABOUT
THAT DAY AND SHE RIGHTS ABOUT IT
IT IN HER BOOK AND IT WAS CLEAR
WOMEN WERE MARGINALIZED ON THAT
STAGE AND DIDN'T EVEN SPEAK AT
THE MARCH.
HOW DID THAT HAPPEN?
WOMEN WERE CERTAINLY THE FOOT
SOLDIERS OF THE MOVEMENT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, AND THEY WERE
REALLY CENTRAL TO ORGANIZING THE
MARCH, AND ORGANIZING ALL THE
DEMONSTRATIONS OF THE CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
A. PHILLIP RANDOLPH, MARTIN
LUTHER KING AND OTHER LEADERS
BELIEVED THAT WOMEN SHOULD NOT
BE IN POSITION OF-- AS
SPOKESPEOPLE OF THE MARCH.
>> Ifill: IT WAS THAT UP
FRONT?
>> THEY WERE VERY-- WELL, THEY
WERE PRETTY FORWARD ABOUT IT.
THERE'S AN INTERESTING-- A
REALLY INTERESTING STORY IS THAT
ANNA ARNOLD HEDGEMAN, WHO WAS
THE ONLY WOMAN ON THE ORGANIZING
COMMITTEE OF THE MARCH AND WHO
HAD WORKED VERY CLOSELY WITH A.
PHILLIP RANDOLPH SINCE THE
1930s SHE WENT TO RANDOLPH AND
SAID, "YOU REALLY NEED TO INVITE
A WOMAN TO BE IN THE OFFICIAL
LEADERSHIP OF THE MARCH."
AND SHE SUGGESTED DOROTHY
HEIGHT.
AND A. PHILLIP RANDOLPH DIDN'T
ANSWER HER, BUT SEVERAL WEEKS
LATER THEY WENT TO A MEETING,
AND HEDGEMANNED FOUND SHE WAS
STILL THE ONLY WOMAN IN THE
LEADERSHIP OF THE MARCH, AND SHE
REALLY-- SHE WROTE A VERY ANGRY
LETTER TO RANDOLPH PROTESTING
THIS.
SOME PEOPLE SUGGESTED ACTUALLY
PICKETING RANDOLPH WHEN HE WAS
PREPARING FOR THE MARCH.
AND HEDGEMAN AND DOROTHY HEIGHT
AND OTHER WOMEN DECIDED TO NOT
MAKE AN ISSUE OF IT RIGHT AFTER
THE MARCH.
BUT THE NIGHT AFTER THE MARCH,
THEY ACTUALLY CALLED A MEETING
AT THE NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS OF
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF NEGRO
WOMEN WHICH WAS THE ORGANIZATION
DOROTHY HEIGHT HEADED, AND AT
THAT MEETING, THEY ACTUALLY
PLANNED A SERIES OF MEETINGS
THAT AS I EXPLAIN IN THE BOOK
CULMINATED IN THE FORMATION OF
THE NATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF
WOMEN AND IT REALLY BECAME A
CATALYZING MOMENT IN THE REBIRTH
OF THE FEMINIST MOVEMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Ifill: AND WOMEN OF COLOR
WERE BEHIND IT, WHICH IS--
>> THEY WERE AT THE CENTER OF
IT.
>> Ifill: WHICH GETS SO LOST.
SO IN THE END, THIS WAS NOT THE
MARCH THAT CREATED VIOLENCE OR
ANY OF THE UPHEAVAL WHICH A LOT
OF PEOPLE FEARED FOR MANY
REASONS.
DID THAT CHANGE THE WAY THE
MOVEMENT ITSELF WAS PERCEIVED
AFTERWARD.
>> IT DID.
I MEAN THERE WAS-- THE MEDIA,
FOR EXAMPLE, EXPRESSED OPEN
SURPRISE AT THE FACT THAT THERE
WEREN'T RIOTS BREAKING OUT IN
WASHINGTON, THAT THAT WAS A
PEACEFUL MARCH.
AND IT REALLY SHIFTED THE MEDIA
PORTRAYAL.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE WAY IN WHICH
NEWSPAPERS REPORTED THE MARCH
LEADING UP TO THE MARCH, UP
UNTIL THE VERY DAY OF THE MARCH,
THE BIG STORY WAS THE DANGER OF
VIOLENCE, AND ALL THE
PREPARATIONS THAT LOCAL
OFFICIALS WERE TAKING TO PREPARE
FOR VIOLENCE.
THE DAY AFTER IT WAS
UNEQUIVOCALLY, POSITIVELY
PORTRAYED EVENT.
THIS WAS A HUGE SUCCESS.
EVEN SOUTHERN WHITE NEWSPAPERS
PORTRAYED IT AS A-- YOU KNOW,
THEY EMPHASIZED THE PEACEFULNESS
OF THE MARCH AND THE POWER OF
THE SPEAKERS.
>> Ifill: 50 YEARS LATER, AS
YOU WERE DOING YOUR RESEARCH FOR
THIS BOOK, WHAT WOULD YOU SAY
THAT WE HAVE FORGOTTEN ABOUT
THAT DAY AND THE YEARS LEADING
UP TO THAT DAY?
>> WELL, I THINK WE'VE FORGOTTEN
THE-- MOST OF THE SPEAKERS AT
THE MARCH.
WE'VE FORGOTTEN MOST OF THE
DEMAND OF THE MARCH WHICH WERE
NOT, AS I SAID EARLIER, NOT JUST
TOWARD RACIAL EQUALITY AND LEGAL
EQUALITY, BUT STRONG FEDERAL
ENFORCEMENT OF CIVIL RIGHTS
LAWS, FEDERAL INTERVENTION IN
THE ECONOMY TO ENSURE THAT
PEOPLE HAVE ACCESS TO NOT JUST A
JOB BUT A WELL-PAID JOB, TO
DECENT HOUSING, TO DECENT
SCHOOLS.
AND THAT THESE THINGS WERE
DEMANDS THAT WERE MADE ON
BEHALF, NOT JUST OF AFRICAN
AMERICANS BUT ALL AMERICANS, AND
THAT THIS WAS A REALLY EXPANSIVE
AND INCLUSIVE AGENDA THAT I
DON'T THINK WE OFTEN ASSOCIATE
WITH THIS EVENT.
>> Ifill: WILLIAM JONES.
THE NAME OF THE BOOK IS THE
MARCH ON WASHINGTON, JOBS,
FREEDOM, AND THE FORGOTTEN
HISTORY OF CIVIL RIGHTS.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR SHARING IT
WITH US.
>> THANK YOU, IT'S BEEN A
PLEASURE.
>> Brown:
>> Brown: ONLINE, WE'RE ASKING:
WHAT IS THE MARCH ON
WASHINGTON'S RELEVANCE TODAY?
WE POSED THAT QUESTION TO A
PANEL OF HISTORIANS.
WATCH THEIR ANSWERS AND ADD
YOURS.
FIND A LINK ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
AND WE'LL CONTINUE OUR 50th
ANNIVERSARY CONVERSATIONS NEXT
WEDNESDAY.
WHEN GWEN TALKS TO ONE OF THE
ORGANIZERS OF THE MARCH,
DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSWOMAN ELEANOR
HOLMES NORTON OF WASHINGTON D.C.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
REMEMBERING VETERAN POLITICAL
JOURNALIST JACK GERMOND.
>> THE ONLY THING WORSE THAN
COVERING THIS CAMPAIGN WOULD NOT
BE COVERING IT.
I'D HATE TO BE STUCK BACK IN
WASHINGTON NOT COVERING IT.
>> Woodruff: FROM THE 1964
CAMPAIGN WITH LYNDON JOHNSON AND
BARRY GOLDWATER, TO THE 2000
ELECTION BETWEEN GEORGE W. BUSH
AND AL GORE, JACK GERMOND DIDN'T
MISS A SINGLE ONE.
HE GOT HIS START REPORTING ON
NATIONAL POLITICS FOR GANNETT
NEWSPAPERS IN 1961, RING TSIO
BECOME WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF.
IN 1974 HE JOINED THE WASHINGTON
STAR, LAUNCHING A COLUMN WITH
JULES WITCOVER.
THE TWO MOVED TO THE BALTIMORE
SUN AFTER THE STAR FOLDED.
THE PAIR ALSO WROTE FOUR BOOKS
ABOUT PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS.
GERMOND WAS AMONG THE
JOURNALISTS PORTRAYED IN TIMOTHY
CROUSE'S "BOYS ON THE BUS,"
WRITTEN ABOUT THE PRESS COVERAGE
OF THE 1972 PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN.
CROUSE DESCRIBED GERMOND AS A
LITTLE CANNONBALL OF A MAN, 44
YEARS OLD, WITH A FRESH,
LEPRECHAUNISH FACE, A FRINGE OF
WHITE HAIR AROUND HIS BALD HEAD,
AND A PUGNACIOUS, HANDS-ON-HIP
MANNER OF TALKING.
MANY AMERICANS WOULD BECOME
FAMILIAR WITH GERMOND'S
CANTANKEROUS STYLE FROM HIS
TELEVISION APPEARANCES,
INCLUDING "THE McLAUGHLIN
GROUP," WHERE HE WAS A REGULAR
PANELIST.
IN 2000, GERMOND SAT DOWN WITH
FORMER "NEWSHOUR" CORRESPONDENT
TERRY SMITH TO DISCUSS HOW
COVERING POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS HAD
CHANGED OVER THE YEARS.
>> WE HAD VERY GOOD ACCESS TO
THE CANDIDATES, AND THEY'D HAVE
DINNER WITH YOU, A COUPLE OF
DRINKS WITH YOU.
THEY WEREN'T AFRAID YOU WERE
GOING TO BLOW THEM UP WITH A ONE
CHEAP STORY.
THEY-- IT WAS AN ENTIRELY
DIFFERENT ATTITUDE.
>> Woodrf: ufGERMOND SAID THAT
NEW DYNAMIC ALSO REFLECTED A
DIFFERENT APPROACH ON THE PART
OF JOURNALISTS.
>> WHEN YOU GET ON A BUS NOW
WITH A CANDIDATE, THERE'S TEN
REPORTERS TALKING ON THEIR CELL
PHONES OR SOMETHING, TALKING TO
SOME PALE DESK PERSON BACK IN
THE OFFICE.
>> Woodruff: JACK GERMOND DIED
WEDNESDAY AT HIS HOME IN WEST
VIRGINIA.
HEAS 8 W5 YEARS OLD.
ON THE CAMPAIGN BUS WITH JACK
GERMOND FOR SEVERAL YEARS WAS
DAN BALZ, CHIEF CORRESPONDENT
FOR THE "WASHINGTON POST."
DAN, THANK YOU FOR BEING WITH
US.
YOU KNOW, I WAS WITH YOU AND
JACK COVERING SOME OF THOSE
CAMPAIGNS, BUT FILL OUT THE
PICTURE A LITTLE BIT MORE FOR
US.
WHOAS J WACK GERMOND?
>> WELL, JACK, JUDY, YOU KNOW,
IN ESSENCE, JACK WAS ONE OF THE
GREATS OF THE GREATEST
GENERATION OF POLITICAL
REPORTERS THAT WE SAW.
I MEAN, IT WAS AN ILLUSTRIOUS
CREW THAT HE WAS PART OF, AND
JACK WAS AN ORIGINAL.
I MEAN, HE WAS AN OLD-FASHIONED
NEWSPAPER REPORTER.
HE WAS A SHOE LEATHER REPORTER.
JACK ALWAYS WANTED TO BE WHERE
THE ACTION WAS.
AND, YOU KNOW, HE GOT TO KNOW
POLITICIANS.
HE WAS SKEPTICAL OF POLITICIANS.
HE WOULD BEAT THEM AROUND IN HIS
COLUMNS, BUT HE ALSO UNDERSTOOD
WHAT DROVE THEM AND THEY TRUSTED
HIM AND HE LIKED AND ADMIRED
MANY OF THEM, BUT HE PULLED NO
PUNCHES AS HE DID IT.
I MEAN, HE WAS JUST A ROLE MODEL
FOR ALL OF US HOW YOU GO ABOUT
COVERING BIG-TIME POLITICS.
>> IT WAS A DIFFERENT ERA IN
COVERING POLITICS.
WHAT MADE IT DIFFERENT, AND HOW
DID JACK WORK HIS MAGIC?
HOW DID HE DO HIS KIND OF
REPORTING?
.>> WELL, JACK WAS A MASTER OF
THE INSIDE GAME, AND IT WAS AT A
TIME WHEN YOU COULD GET INSIDE
IN A MORE SIGNIFICANT WAY THAN
NOW.
I MEAN, JACK OTHER ANDS OPERATED
AT A TIME WHEN POLITICIANS WERE
NOT KEPT AS COCOONED AS THEY ARE
TODAY FROM POLITICAL REPORTERS.
HE COULD GO OUT TO DINNER WITH
THEM.
AND AS HE SAID, HE KNEW-- OR
THEY KNEW THAT HE WASN'T GOING
TO BLOW THEM OUT OF THE WATER
WITH ONE CHEAP STORY.
IT WAS A WAY FOR HIM TO GET A
GREATER UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT
MADE THESE PEOPLE TICK, AND
THAT'S AN INVALUABLE THING THAT
OFTEN IS LOST TODAY.
THERE IS SUCH GREAT DISTANCE
BETWEEN POLITICIANS AND
REPORTERS, AND, AGAIN, I DON'T
MEAN IT IN THE COZY SENSE.
JACK WAS NOT COZY WITH PEOPLE.
BUT JACK FOUND A WAY TO GET TO
KNOW THEM, TO BE ABLE TO TELL
HIS READERS IN A MORE
SIGNIFICANT WAY WHAT THEY WERE
ALL ABOUT.
AND THE OTHER THING HE DID,
JUDY, WHICH, YOU KNOW, AGAIN HAS
BECOME A LITTLE BIT MORE OF A
LOST ART, JACK WAS ALWAYS OUT
THERE WHERE THE ACTION WAS.
HE KNEW POLITICIANS AND
POLITICAL OPERATIVES IN EVERY
STATE.
HE UNDERSTOOD THE INTERNAL
POLITICS OF STATES.
HE ALWAYS FELT THAT YOU HAD TO
BE ON THE GROUND TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT WAS GOING ON IN AMERICAN
POLITICS.
>> HE WAS LARGER THAN LIFE IN
MANY WAYS, AND YOU WERE SAYING
TO US TODAY, HE HAD AN APPETITE.
THERE IS-- HE WAS A UNIQUE
PERSONALITY.
>> HE WAS.
AND IT WAS ONE OF THE THINGS
THEY THINK ENDEARED HIM TO SO
MANY PEOPLE.
I MEAN, HE LIKED GOOD FOOD.
HE LIKED GOOD DRINK.
HE LOVED GOOD CONVERSATION.
AND HE WAS A TERRIFIC
STORYTELLER.
AND, YOU KNOW, HE WOULD GO WORK
THROUGHOUT THE DAY AND FILE HIS
STORIES AND PEOPLE WOULD REPAIR
TO A RESTAURANT OR BAR LATE AT
NIGHT AND HE WOULD REGALE PEOPLE
WITH STORIES ABOUT POLITICIANS
HE HAD COVERED IN THE PAST
AND I KNOW AS A YOUNG REPORTER,
HE WAS EXTREMELY KIND TO ME.
THERE WAS NO PARTICULAR REASON
HE NEEDED TO DO THAT BUT HE WAS
ALWAYS VERY WELCOMING TO ME AND
TAUGHT ME A LOT ABOUT HOW YOU GO
ABOUT THIS.
>> ONE LAST THING.
YOU WERE TELLING US EARLIER
TODAY ABOUT THE GERMOND UPON
RULE.
HAFS THAT.
>> THE GERMOND RULE WAS AT
DINNER, NO MATTER WHAT THE BILL
WAS AND NO MATTER HOW MUCH OR
HOW LITTLE YOU HAD EATEN, YOU
SPLIT THE BILL EVENLY.
THAT WAS ONE GERMOND RULE.
AND ANOTHER ONE HE TOLD ME AS I
WAS ABOUT TO MAKE MY WAY INTO
THE FAR NORTHERN REACHES OF NEW
HAMPSHIRE TO CHASE A CANDIDATE
WHOSE NAME I CAN'T RECALL AT
THIS POINT, HE SAID, "MY RULE
ALWAYS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE IS NEVER
GO NORTH WITH A CANDIDATE WHO IS
BELOW 20% IN THE POLLS."
AND IT IS SOMETHING I ALWAYS
REMEMBER IN MY TRAVELS SINCE IN
NEW HAMPSHIRE.
.>> ALL RIGHT, THE ONE AND ONLY
DAN BALZ, WITH THE "WASHINGTON
POST."
THANK YOU.
.>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
.>> THERE ARE MORE ONLINE.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
VIOLENCE RIPPLED ACROSS EGYPT
AFTER SECURITY FORCES BROKE UP
SIT-IN PROTESTS BY SUPPORTERS OF
OUSTED PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT SAID MORE
THAN 270 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
AND FOR THE FIRST TIME IN NEARLY
FIVE YEARS, ISRAELI AND
PALESTINIAN PEACE NEGOTIATORS
HELD TALKS IN JERUSALEM.
>> Woodruff: SUMMER MAY BE
WINDING DOWN, BUT THERE'S STILL
TIME TO GET ITCHY POISON IVY.
ONLINE, A LOOK AT THE PLANTS YOU
HOPE NOT TO SEE.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS MORE.
>> Holman: POISON IVY: IT'S OUT,
IT'S RAMPANT, AND SOME
CARBON DIOXIDE LEVELS MAKE
ON SCIENCE WEDNESDAY, DO HIGHER
PLANTS GROW FASTER AND MORE
CARBON DIOXIDE LEVELS MAKE
POISONOUS?
PLANTS GROW FASTER AND MORE
PLUS, FIND A MAP OF WHERE YOU'LL
POISONOUS?
ENCOUNTER POISON IVY, OAK AND
PLUS, FIND A MAP OF WHERE YOU'LL
SUMAC ACROSS THE U.S.
ENCOUNTER POISON IVY, OAK AND
AND ON MAKING SENSE, ECONOMIST
SUMAC ACROSS THE U.S.
DEAN BAKER WRITES ABOUT HOW THE
AND ON MAKING SENSE, ECONOMIST
MEDIA COVERS NEWS ABOUT THE
DEAN BAKER WRITES ABOUT HOW THE
FEDERAL BUDGET.
MEDIA COVERS NEWS ABOUT THE
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
FEDERAL BUDGET.
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
JUDY?
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
JUDY?
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT WHAT
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
LIES AHEAD FOR EGYPT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT WHAT
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
LIES AHEAD FOR EGYPT.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
GOOD NIGHT.